



Network Working Group                                        J. A. (Ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                               S. K. (Ed.)
Expires: 1 September 2025                                          Cisco
                                                                M. Welzl
                                                      University of Oslo
                                                                A. Clemm
                                                                        
                                                               A. Rezaki
                                                                   Nokia
                                                             E. Schooler
                                                                        
                                                               S. Rumley
                                                                    HEFR
                                                            H. ElBakoury
                                                                        
                                                              E. Stephan
                                                                  Orange
                                                              M. Palmero
                                                                   Cisco
                                                              A. Keränen
                                                                Ericsson
                                                         L. M. Contreras
                                                              Telefonica
                                                             J. Lindblad
                                                             All For Eco
                                                        28 February 2025


    Architectural Considerations for Sustainable Internet Technology
                draft-eimpact-arch-considerations-latest

Abstract

   This document discusses protocol and network architecture aspects
   that may have an impact on the sustainability of network technology.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://jariarkko.github.io/draft-eimpact-arch-considerations/draft-
   eimpact-arch-considerations.html.  Status information for this
   document may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
   eimpact-arch-considerations/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/jariarkko/draft-eimpact-arch-considerations.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 1 September 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Potential Architectural Aspects
     2.1.  Measurement
       2.1.1.  Motivation
       2.1.2.  Analysis
       2.1.3.  Recommendation
     2.2.  Modelling
       2.2.1.  Motivation
       2.2.2.  Analysis
       2.2.3.  Recommendation
     2.3.  Dynamic Scaling
       2.3.1.  Motivation
       2.3.2.  Analysis
       2.3.3.  Recommendation
     2.4.  Transport
       2.4.1.  Motivation
       2.4.2.  Analysis
       2.4.3.  Recommendation
     2.5.  Equipment Longevity
       2.5.1.  Motivation
       2.5.2.  Analysis
       2.5.3.  Recommendation
     2.6.  Compact encoding
       2.6.1.  Motivation
       2.6.2.  Analysis
       2.6.3.  Recommendation
     2.7.  Resiliency
       2.7.1.  Motivation
       2.7.2.  Analysis
       2.7.3.  Recommendation
     2.8.  Measurement Architecture
     2.9.  ...
   3.  Recommendations for Further Work and Research
   4.  Security Considerations
   5.  IANA Considerations
   6.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Sustainability is an important consideration in networking.  Both for
   ensuring that networking technology can enable societies to operate
   in a sustainable manner and that the networks themselves are
   sustainable.

   This document discusses protocol and network architecture aspects
   that may have an impact on the sustainability of network technology.

   Where good design and architecture can improve the sustainability of
   networks, we should of course apply them when designing new protocols
   and building networks.

   But what is such good design and architecture?  Are there guidelines
   that can be given?  Intuitively, protocol and network architecture
   may in some cases have an impact on sustainability.  At the very
   least the right design and architecture can make it possible to have
   a positive impact, but of course the architecture alone is not
   enough.  The possibilities offered by the architecture need to be
   employed by implementations and practical deployments.

   To give an example of architectural aspect that potentially has a
   sustainability impact, enabling the collection of information (e.g.,
   energy consumption) and then using that information to make smarter
   decisions is one.  For instance, understanding power consumption of
   individual nodes can be valuable input to future purchasing decisions
   or development efforts to improve the power consumption.

   Other architectural examples include making it possible to scale
   resources or resource selection processes performed in a
   sustainability-aware fashion.  The use of communication primitives
   that maximise utility in a given problem (e.g., using multicast) or
   the use technologies that reduce the number or size of messages
   needed for a given task (e.g., binary encoding instead of textual)
   are some further examples.

   Of course, some of these aspects may have a major impact on
   sustainability, where others may only have a minor effect.  There are
   also tradeoffs, such as side-effects of architectural choices, e.g.,
   dynamic scaling of a router network potentially impacting jitter.

   This document discusses some of these architectural aspects and
   considerations related to them, and tries to give guidance where such
   guidance can be given.

   The scope of the document is advice on Internet and protocol
   architecture, such as what architecture or capabilities new protocol
   designs or features should have, what kind of operational network
   architectures should be deployed, and how all of these can be
   designed to best address sustainability concerns.

   The document is intended to help engineering efforts in the IETF,
   provide guidance for operationals in the operator community, or point
   to research directions in the IRTF.

   This document is not focused on general issues around sustainability,
   except those that pertain to architecture or significant protocol
   features.

2.  Potential Architectural Aspects

2.1.  Measurement

   You have to know what is going on before you can improve.  Some level
   of measurements are necessary for improving sustainability.  This is
   particularly the case when looking at the systems as a whole in post-
   analysis.  As discussed earlier, this level of measurements is useful
   input for further actions, such as deciding what parts of the network
   need further improvement.

   But measurements may also be useful for some dynamic situations where
   power-saving decisions for instance depend on knowing the relative
   power consumption of different activities, such as when a power-off
   decision involves understanding the relative savings during the
   shutdown period vs. the power cost of shutdown and startup
   procedures, or possible need to reconfigure other other nodes in the
   network due to the shutdown.

2.1.1.  Motivation

   Measurements are a necessary mechanism for both post-analysis and
   potentially some of the dynamic decisions taken by systems.  Without
   measurements, only aggregate power consumption can be measured, but
   for instance no per-device data about real power usage will be
   available, and as such, there's limited basis for deciding what
   improvements are most useful.

2.1.2.  Analysis

   While the simplest forms of sustainability-related measurements are
   about power, there's clearly room for other measurements and other
   information as well.  To begin with, power consumption by itself may
   not be what matters most for sustainability, as the source of the
   power may be more significant in terms of the actual carbon
   footprint.

   Secondly, for many classes of devices the embedded carbon aspects or
   use of raw materials may be a significant sustainability issue.  See
   also Section 2.2.

   But when it comes to energy consumption, operators know their total
   energy consumption already (see the utility bill), and it's not
   particularly hard to measure the energy consumption of individial
   network devices either.  Still, there are a number of desirable use
   cases where the measurement situation needs to improve.

2.1.2.1.  Measuring Power Efficiency

   When assessing the power consumption (Scope 2) of an IT-organization,
   emission accountants are generally looking for a metric of the
   delivered value per unit of energy.

   A commonly used method is to equate the delivered value with the
   number of bits sent or received.  But applying this to a video
   conferencing operation, for example, would mean that if a 10%
   improvement of the compression algorithm is introduced at unchanged
   power usage, the operation would suddenly seem to be 10% less
   efficient.

   There are many more strange effects like the one above with this
   approach.  The value definition needs to be more stable than
   depending on the number of transmitted bits.

2.1.2.2.  Customer Attribution

   When organizations assess their Scope 3 emissions, they need to sum
   up their share of emissions from all their suppliers, one of which
   for example, might be a cloud hosting service.  In order for the
   supplier to provide an emission share value back to the customer, the
   provider needs to develop an attribution formula.

2.1.2.3.  Continuous Improvement

   In order for an organization to continuously keep pushing for a more
   power efficient operation, knowing the power consumption totals,
   possibly divided up by customer, is typically not enough.

   In order to get information that is actionable, a more granular data
   collection is required.  How much power goes to compute, network,
   security, monitoring and management?  Is our cooling as efficient as
   the industry standard?

2.1.2.4.  Development of Science

   Scientists working on power efficiency need real world data to work
   with.  Data collection for such purposes might not need to be always
   on, but needs to have a clear content declaration, transparent
   provenance and computation methods that allow comparisons.

2.1.3.  Recommendation

   Ongoing work at the IETF's GREEN working group is already improving
   existing energy consumption metrics and frameworks.  Some further
   considerations apply, however.  In order to meet the needs of the use
   cases discussed above, the following architectural design principles
   are proposed.

2.1.3.1.  Generality

   We recommend that any measurement framework or sustainability-related
   information sharing mechanism be designed to share different types of
   information, and not limited to a single metric such as power
   consumption.

2.1.3.2.  Collect Metrics from Existing Equipment

   Since the need to deliver on the use cases described is urgent, the
   industry has to accept working with the capabilities of existing
   equipment in the field.  A plug-in architecture with modules that can
   work with (read from and control) devices of any kind, including
   traditional networking hardware devices, cooling systems, software
   stacks, and occasionally static datasheets.

2.1.3.3.  Content Declaration for all Collected Metrics

   A warehouse filled with data collected from diverse sources is
   useless without proper labling.  Create metadata that describes the
   collected data.  What are the source(s)?  What measurement units?
   Precision?  What is included/excluded in these numbers?

   The metadata itself must also have a formal description.  Use YANG
   for the metadata schema.  Keep the metadata attached to the dataflow
   it describes, so that the relation is clear to each component that
   has anything to do with it, including components added by other
   organizations at a later point in time.

2.1.3.4.  Collection, Aggregation, Processing, Display, Decisions

   The collected data passes through a pipeline from collection to
   decisions.  By processing we mean steps to reshape the data to match
   further aggregation and processing steps, such as unit conversions,
   sample frequency alignment, filtering, etc.

   Separate these architectural roles into separate modules in order to
   enable reuse, modulear development and a transparent, configurable
   pipeline.

2.1.3.5.  Configurable Pipeline for Reuse and Transparency

   Let the pipeline connections between the components be driven by
   configuration rather than hard coded.  This enables reconfiguration
   of the processing pipeline over time, and perhaps more importantly,
   transparency into what stages the data pass through, even without
   access to or understanding of the source code of the entire system.

2.1.3.6.  Design Together with the Users

   Every system should be designed involving some of its target users.
   In order for delivered metrics to be of any value, the target
   audience needs to be aware of their existence, be able to interpret
   them and understand how they can be used in their professional
   context.

   There are many target user groups for the information produced.  Some
   examples are scientists, operations teams and IT-development
   organizations.  One crtitical group that is often overlooked is the
   sustainability assessment experts.  If they are not aware, don't
   understand or don't care about the produced sustainability metrics,
   the value of this work would be greatly diminished.

2.2.  Modelling

   The paucity of up-to-date information on equipment and system
   parameters, especially power consumption and maximum throughput,
   makes estimating the power consumption and energy efficiency of these
   systems extremely challenging.  In addition the rapid evolution of
   technology and products in ICT makes the estimation quickly out-dated
   and possibly inaccurate.  In almost all cases physical measurement
   has to be replaced by partial measurement and mathematical modelling.

2.2.1.  Motivation

   Where power optimization choices are made, accurate information is
   required to decide the right choice.  Modelling instead of
   measurements may have to be used in some cases.

2.2.2.  Analysis

   To date, two approaches to network power modelling are accepted as
   providing a realistic estimate of network power consumption.  These
   approaches are referred to as "bottom-up" and "top-down".  The paper
   [Unifying] surveys both approaches and provide a new approach which
   unifies both of them.  The unified approach is used to estimate the
   power consumption of access, aggregation and core networks.

   The paper [Modelling] provides a model for IP Routers and the routers
   of other future Internet architectures (FIA) such as SCION and
   NEBULA.  They use a generic model which captures the commonalities of
   IP router as well as the peculiarities of FIA routers.  They conduct
   a large-scale simulation based on this router model to estimate the
   power consumption for different network architectures.

   Since routers and other network devices and functions can be
   virtualized, this article (1) provides comprehensive "graphical,
   analytical survey of the literature, over the period 2010–2020, on
   the measurement of power consumption and relevant power models of
   virtual entities as they apply to the telco cloud."  This paper A
   Methodology and Testbed to Develop an Energy Model for 5G Virtualized
   RANs IEEE Conference Publication IEEE Xplore got best paper award for
   GreenNet 2024, but I am not sure if we are interested to model 5G
   vRAN.

   There are plethora of publications on modeling communication networks
   and DC computing.

2.2.3.  Recommendation

   It is still to be determined to what extent we need to work on
   modeling networks and devices in the architecture.  Is this outside
   the scope of architecture?

2.3.  Dynamic Scaling

   The ability to adjust resources to need, and possibly turn some of
   them off during periods of low usage.  Examples include the set of
   servers needed for a service, how many duplicate links are needed to
   carry high-volume traffic, whether one needs all base stations with
   overlapping coverage areas to be on, etc.

2.3.1.  Motivation

   Outside implementation improvements, dynamic scaling is perhaps the
   method with most promise for reducing power consumption related
   environmental impacts.  Dynamic scaling would not have an impact in
   situations where there's only a single router, base station, or
   server serving a particular route, area, or function.  However, most
   large systems have significant amount of redundancy and spare
   capacity.  Where such capacity can be turned on or off to match the
   actual need at a given time, significant power consumption reductions
   can be achieved.

2.3.2.  Analysis

   Dynamic scaling could be seen as either an alternative or
   complementary to load stabilization, e.g., via "peak shaving".
   Perhaps the most realistic angle is that both are likely needed.

   The most rudimentary approach to dynamic scaling is just turning some
   resources off.  However, often this is not sufficient and a more
   graceful/engineered approach potentially yields better results.

   A network architects need to understand the impacts of scaling
   changes on users and traffic.  These may include fate of ongoing
   sessions, latency/jitter, packets in flight, or running processes,
   attempts to contact resources that are no longer present, and the
   time it takes for the network to converge to its new state.

   Dynamic scaling requires an understanding of load levels for the
   network, so information collection is required.  It also requires
   understanding the power, time and other costs of making changes.
   (See [I-D.pignataro-enviro-sustainability-architecture] for
   discussion of tradeoffs and multi-objective optimization.)

   Some of the strategies that are useful in implementing a well working
   dynamic scaling include:

   *  Ability to enter "no new work" mode for equipment, to enable some
      resources to be eventually released/turned off.

   *  Ability to move ongoing tasks off to other equipment, to prevent
      disruption of already started tasks.

   *  Ability to schedule changes rather than making them abruptly, with
      associated signaling exchanges and possible transient routing and
      other failures.  See for instance the time-variant routing work in
      the IETF [RFC9657][I-D.ietf-tvr-requirements][I-D.ietf-tvr-schedul
      e-yang][I-D.ietf-tvr-alto-exposure].

   *  Efficient propagation of changes of new routes, new set of
      servers, etc. as to reduce the amount of time where state across
      the network is not synchronized.  The needs for the propagation
      solution needs to be driven by dynamic scaling and sustainability
      as well as other aspects, such as recovery from failures.

   *  Never expect a fixed set of resources, plan for dynamic set of
      resources, and build mechanisms to deal with dynamic changes.

   *  Dynamic scaling requires automation in most cases.  See again
      [I-D.pignataro-enviro-sustainability-architecture] for a
      discussion of automation.

   From Hesham:

   Energy-aware routing generally aims at aggregating traffic flows over
   a subset of the network devices and links, allowing other links and
   interconnection devices to be switched off.  These solutions shall
   preserve connectivity and QoS, for instance by limiting the maximum
   utilization over any link, or ensuring a minimum level of path
   diversity.  The following 2 slides provides classifications of energy
   aware routing algorithms.

   There are also algorithms for Green Traffic engineering.  Here is an
   example which uses segment routing [Segment].  The empirical analysis
   of this algorithm is described in [Experiment].  The results of this
   analysis showed that the resource usage for SRv6 could be more than
   70% lower than that of the SPF-based forwarding, depending on the
   network topology.

   Using load adaptive technique allows the capacity of the nodes to be
   dynamically adjusted according to the demand.  Examples include:
   Adaptive Link Rate (ALR): Adapt Link Rate to suit traffic demand and
   Dynamically or power off links in Link Aggregation based on traffic
   demand which is empirically estimated based on traffic arrival.  LACP
   (Link Aggregation Control Protocol) defined in IEEE 802.1AX
   [LinkAggregation] can be modified to power off links in an
   aggregation if they are not needed.

   We can use dynamic load shifting such as a demand-response technique
   where the system temporarily reduces its energy usage in response to
   pricing signals from a smart grid.  The proposed demand-response
   technique involves deferring the load from elastic requests to later
   time periods in order to reduce the server demand and the current
   energy usage, and hence, energy costs [LoadShifting].

2.3.3.  Recommendation

   The guidelines above need to be considered specifically for each
   protocol and system design.

   TBD implementation and deployment guidance

2.4.  Transport

   Transport protocols are the flexible tools that make it possible for
   communication flows between parties to adjust themselves to the
   dynamic conditions that exist in the network at any given time:
   available bandwidth, delays, congestion, the ability of a peer to
   send or receive traffic, and so on.  Depending on the conditions, an
   individual flow may carry traffic at widely different rates, may
   pause for some time, etc.  Various higher-level transport solutions
   may also cache or pre-fetch information.

   This behavior will have an effect on sustainability as well, e.g., in
   what periods the endpoint and network systems are active or when they
   could be in reduced activity or sleep states.

2.4.1.  Motivation

   Transport behaviour would have a possibility of impacting how much
   downtime or sleep can be had in the communication system, either on
   the end systems or routers or other equipment in between.  The
   savings can be significant, at least in wireless systems.

   Improvements through transport behaviour are only useful if the
   involved systems have power proportionality.

2.4.2.  Analysis

   A critical issue is the tradeoff involved in sending traffic.  As
   argued in [NotTradeOff], reducing the amount of time the endpoints
   and the network are active can sometimes help save energy, e.g. in
   case the receiver is connected over a WiFi link.  Similar logic
   applies for any technology that has a certain degree of energy
   proportionality, e.g. cellular communication.  As a result, in
   general, delivering information as rapidly as possible would appear
   to be desirable.

   On the other hand, bandwidth-intensive applications can influence
   other applications or users by presenting a significant load on the
   network, and consequently reducing capacity available for others, or
   increasing buffering (and with it, latency) across the network path.
   For an application with intermittent data transfers, such as
   streaming video, this would seem to speak in favor of sustained but
   lower-rate delivery instead of transmitting short high-rate bursts
   [Sammy].  However, this is in contradiction with the energy-saving
   approach above.  Thus, the tradeoff is: should data be sent in a way
   that is "friendly" to others (avoiding bad interference), or should
   it save energy by sending fast, increasing the chance for equipment
   to enter a "sleep" state?

   At the time of writing, the common choice for video is to opt for
   high rate delivery, potentially saving energy, and possibly at the
   expense of other traffic.  For non-urgent data transfers, the IETF-
   recommended default approach is the opposite: the LEDBAT congestion
   control mechanism [RFC6817], which is designed for such use, will
   always "step out of the way" of other traffic, giving it a low rate
   when it competes with any other traffic.  Alternatively, if the goal
   is to reduce energy, such traffic could be sent at a high rate, at a
   strategically good moment within a longer time interval; this would
   give network equipment an opportunity to enter a sleep state in the
   remaining time period within the interval.

   Perhaps the issue is that the transport behavior (as with many other
   things) needs to take into account multiple parameters.  For example,
   it is possible that a balanced transport algorithm would be able to
   send as much as possible as soon as possible, while tracking buffer
   growth from transmission delays and scaling back if there's any
   buffer growth.  This remains to be confirmed with experiments,
   however.

   Similarly, caching and pre-fetching designs need to take into account
   not only the likehood of having acquired the right content in memory,
   but also the sustainability cost of possibly fetching too much or the
   timing of those fetching operations.

   In general, information about the impacts of loading or not loading
   the network with additional traffic, and whether a certain sending
   pattern enables power savings through sleep modes, would be
   beneficial for the communicating endpoints.  Mechanisms for making
   such information available to the endpoints would be useful.

   (TBD add something about LEDBAT per Emile's comment)

2.4.3.  Recommendation

   What is said here is, however, just a theoretical analysis.  We
   recommend simulation and experiments to confirm what strategies would
   provide the best end-user and energy performance.  Perhaps work for
   the IRTF SUSTAIN RG.

   TBD implementation and deployment guidance

2.5.  Equipment Longevity

   The ability to extend the useful life of protocols and/or network
   equipment in order to amortize the embedded energy costs over a
   longer period, even though it may mean that the protocols/equipment
   may not be fully optimized for the present use.  This includes
   devising tools to inform network administrators and their users of
   the potential benefits of network equipment upgrades, so that they
   can make better choices on what upgrades are necessary and when.

   It should be noted that from an environmental sustainability
   perspective, it is not necessarily always the best choice to upgrade
   network equipment whenever slightly less power-hungry and "greener"
   alternatives become availabe.  The environmental cost of amortizing
   the carbon embedded inside equipment over its lifetime, for example,
   the carbon associated with the manufacturing of the equipment that is
   to be replaced, should be taken into consideration as well.

2.5.1.  Motivation

   Embedded carbon and raw materials can be a significant part of the
   overall environmental impact of systems.  If this can be improved for
   devices that are manufactured in large quantities, the improvements
   can be significant.

   Long equipment lifetimes are only useful if the longer lifetimes can
   be achieved without compromising other aspects of sustainability,
   such as when using a high-end and power-hungry router in place of
   small routers.

2.5.2.  Analysis

   When we engineer protocols and network equipment, we are inclined to
   design them in a highly optimized manner for a very specific set of
   requirements, use cases and context.  While this is necessary in
   certain cases (e.g. constrained nodes with limits on processing
   capacity or long lived battery powered devices), there are cetainly
   cases where such optimized equipment is not absolutely required.  The
   vast majority of infrastucture network nodes on the Internet utilize
   only a faction of their design capacity most of the time.

   Designing the equipment with an eye on longevity comes with a set of
   advantages:

   *  It allows the same equipment and protocols could be reused in a
      different context in the future. e.g. A core router of today can
      become an edge router in a near future and an access router in the
      further future if the protocol implementations are adaptable.

   *  It can reduce complexity in implementations as well as in network
      management that are usually indicated in highly optimized systems

   *  It can let network equipment operate for a longer period and can
      reduce the frequency of hardware upgrades, in turn reducing the
      environmental impact associated with manufacturing, transporting,
      and disposing of the old/new hardware.

   *  One key disadvantage may be that not optimizing may result in the
      need for premature upgrades for capacity and this needs to be
      taken into account.

   Hence, it is very likely that extending the life of protocols and
   equipment with higher flexibility could provide a better
   environmental benefit than tightly optimizing only for today’s uses.

   Another aspect that can play an important role in extending the
   longevity of equipment concerns software-defined networking, in the
   sense of designing networking equipment in such a way that new
   equipment capabilities and features can be introduced via software
   upgrades as opposed to requiring hardware replacement.  This requires
   system architectures that incorporate the necessary infrastructure to
   support such upgrades in a secure manner that does not compromise
   equipment integrity.

2.5.3.  Recommendation

   The guidelines above should be considered for any new system design.
   If some aspect of protocol or network equipment design choice could
   be made more generic and flexible without a significant performance
   and sustainability impact, it needs to be studied in further detail.
   Specifically, the potential additional sustainability costs due to
   forgoing optimization need to be weighed against the potential
   savings in embedded carbon and raw material costs brought about by
   premature upgrades.  There are also cases where equipment upgrades
   are done to provide better peak performance characteristics (e.g.
   higher advertised speeds towards consumers) and these need to be
   viewed as well with the same tradeoffs in mind.  Finally, when
   designing networks it is recommended to consider whether it is
   possible to reuse retiring equipment in a different location or for a
   different function (e.g. move it to lower traffic geographies, core
   routers become edge/access routers etc.)

2.6.  Compact encoding

   This is about better encoding methods, such as using binary instead
   of text.

2.6.1.  Motivation

   Better encoding can obviously reduce the length of message sents.  It
   remains a question mark how big overall impact this is, however.  It
   should only be performed if it gives a measurable overall impact.

2.6.2.  Analysis

   Better encoding methods are clearly benefical for improving the
   detailed-level effectiveness of communications.

   The main questions are, however:

   *  Is the effect of this is at a magnitude comparable to the other
      things, or if it is just absolutely tiny?  Particularly
      considering that much of the traffic on the Internet is video, and
      much of that is other content than, e.g., HTTP headers.  Moran et
      al. argued in their 2022 paper [CBORGreener] [RFC9547] that that
      for a weather data example from [RFC8428] [RFC9193] there are
      significant savings.  However, this needs more research in terms
      of the overall impact across different examples and the general
      make up of Internet traffic.

   *  At what layer is the compactness achieved?  Are link, IP, or
      transport layer mechanisms that can compact some of the verbose
      messaging useful, or should each and every protocol have optimal
      compacting?

   *  Tradeoffs related to compressing (particularly if AI-based
      computationally expensive methods are used).

2.6.3.  Recommendation

   More research is needed to quantify the likely sources of measurable
   impacts.

   TBD implementation and deployment guidance

2.7.  Resiliency

   This is about weight that migh impact future archs as they did not
   exist, aka where implicit, in the pass.

2.7.1.  Motivation

   It is not so easy to focus on impacts of this or that on
   architectural evolution because it is difficult to focus on
   architecture by itself.  But we can ask ourselves what will impact
   the future architecture that didn't exist explicitly in the pass.

2.7.2.  Analysis

   Resiliency might impact much more the adaptation and the design of
   the architecture in the future decades than it did in the past 20
   years.

   It might be divided in axis like 'Resiliency to power breakage',
   'Resiliency to lack of material' that can be filtered wrt their
   impacts on device, network ... architectures

2.7.3.  Recommendation

   TBD

2.8.  Measurement Architecture

   Is measurement architectures in scope of this activity or left for
   the GREEN WG?

2.9.  ...

   Add other considerations as needed: Transparency etc.

3.  Recommendations for Further Work and Research

   Transport-related optimizations that enable devices to consume less
   power by sleeping more appear potential, but require further
   research, perhaps as part of the efforts in the SUSTAIN RG.

   TBD

   ...

4.  Security Considerations

   It is possible that the introduction of features and architectural
   properties to facilitate environmentally sustainable Internet
   technology introduces new attack vectors or other security
   ramifications.

   For example, the introduction of measurements and metrics for the
   purpose of saving energy could be misused for the opposite effect
   when compromised.  For example, measurements might be be tampered
   with in order to cause an operator to waste energy.  Energy
   measurements, when abused, might also result in compromised security,
   for example by allowing to infer usage profiles.  They could also be
   abused to implement a covert communications channel in which
   information is leaked via tampered measurement values that are being
   reported.

   Networking features and technology choices may have security
   implications regardless of why they are introduced, including for
   reasons of environmental sustainability.  The possibility of this
   needs to be taken into consideration, understood, and communicated to
   allow for their mitigation.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

6.  Informative References

   [CBORGreener]
              Moran, B., Birkholz, H., and C. Bormann, "CBOR is Greener
              than JSON", Position paper in the 2022 IAB Workshop
              Environmental Impact of Internet Applications and
              Systems , October 2022.

   [Experiment]
              Groningen, J. and C. Lung, "Green Network Traffic
              Engineering Using Segment Routing: an Experiment Report",
              2024 20th International Conference on Network and Service
              Management (CNSM) , 2024.

   [I-D.ietf-tvr-alto-exposure]
              Contreras, L. M., "Using ALTO for exposing Time-Variant
              Routing information", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-tvr-alto-exposure-00, 23 December 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-tvr-
              alto-exposure-00>.

   [I-D.ietf-tvr-requirements]
              King, D., Contreras, L. M., Sipos, B., and L. Zhang, "TVR
              (Time-Variant Routing) Requirements", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-tvr-requirements-04, 13
              September 2024, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-tvr-requirements-04>.

   [I-D.ietf-tvr-schedule-yang]
              Qu, Y., Lindem, A., Kinzie, E., Fedyk, D., and M.
              Blanchet, "YANG Data Model for Scheduled Attributes", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-tvr-schedule-yang-
              03, 20 October 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-tvr-
              schedule-yang-03>.

   [I-D.pignataro-enviro-sustainability-architecture]
              Pignataro, C., Rezaki, A., Krishnan, S., Arkko, J., Clemm,
              A., and H. ElBakoury, "Architectural Considerations for
              Environmental Sustainability", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-pignataro-enviro-sustainability-architecture-
              01, 27 December 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-pignataro-
              enviro-sustainability-architecture-01>.

   [LinkAggregation]
              "IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks--
              Link Aggregation", IEEE STD 802.1AX-2020 (Revision of IEEE
              STD 802.1AX-2014): 1–333. doi:10.1109/
              IEEESTD.2020.9105034. ISBN 978-1-5044-6428-4 , May 2020.

   [LoadShifting]
              Mathew, V., Sitaraman, R. K., and P. Shenoy, "Reducing
              energy costs in Internet-scale distributed systems using
              load shifting", Sixth International Conference on
              Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS), Bangalore,
              India, pp. 1-8, doi: 10.1109/COMSNETS.2014.6734894 , 2014.

   [Modelling]
              Chen, C., Barrera, D., and A. Perrig, "Modeling Data-Plane
              Power Consumption of Future Internet Architectures", IEEE
              2nd International Conference on Collaboration and Internet
              Computing (CIC), Pittsburgh, PA, USA, pp. 149-158, doi:
              10.1109/CIC.2016.031 , 2016.

   [NotTradeOff]
              Welzl, M., "Not a Trade-Off: On the Wi-Fi Energy
              Efficiency of Effective Internet Congestion Control", 17th
              Wireless On-Demand Network Systems and Services Conference
              (WONS), Oppdal, Norway, pp. 1-4, doi: 10.23919/
              WONS54113.2022.9764413 , 2022.

   [RFC6817]  Shalunov, S., Hazel, G., Iyengar, J., and M. Kuehlewind,
              "Low Extra Delay Background Transport (LEDBAT)", RFC 6817,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6817, December 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6817>.

   [RFC8428]  Jennings, C., Shelby, Z., Arkko, J., Keranen, A., and C.
              Bormann, "Sensor Measurement Lists (SenML)", RFC 8428,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8428, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8428>.

   [RFC9193]  Keränen, A. and C. Bormann, "Sensor Measurement Lists
              (SenML) Fields for Indicating Data Value Content-Format",
              RFC 9193, DOI 10.17487/RFC9193, June 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9193>.

   [RFC9547]  Arkko, J., Perkins, C. S., and S. Krishnan, "Report from
              the IAB Workshop on Environmental Impact of Internet
              Applications and Systems, 2022", RFC 9547,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9547, February 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9547>.

   [RFC9657]  Birrane, III, E., Kuhn, N., Qu, Y., Taylor, R., and L.
              Zhang, "Time-Variant Routing (TVR) Use Cases", RFC 9657,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9657, October 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9657>.

   [Sammy]    Bruce Spang, Shravya Kunamalla, Renata Teixeira, Te-Yuan
              Huang, Grenville Armitage, Ramesh Johari, and Nick
              McKeown, "Sammy: smoothing video traffic to be a friendly
              internet neighbor", In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023
              Conference (ACM SIGCOMM '23). Association for Computing
              Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 754–768.
              https://doi.org/10.1145/3603269.3604839 , 2023.

   [Segment]  Lung, C. and H. ElBakoury, "Exploiting Segment Routing and
              SDN Features for Green Traffic Engineering", IEEE 8th
              International Conference on Network Softwarization
              (NetSoft), Milan, Italy, pp. 49-54, doi: 10.1109/
              NetSoft54395.2022.9844091 , 2022.

   [Unifying] Ishii, K., Kurumida, J., K.-i Sato, Kudoh, T., and S.
              Namiki, "Unifying Top-Down and Bottom-Up Approaches to
              Evaluate Network Energy Consumption", In Journal of
              Lightwave Technology, vol. 33, no. 21, pp. 4395-4405, doi:
              10.1109/JLT.2015.2469145 , November 2015.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Jari Arkko (Ed.)
   Ericsson
   Email: jari.arkko@gmail.com


   Suresh Krishnan (Ed.)
   Cisco
   Email: sureshk@cisco.com


   Michael Welzl
   University of Oslo
   Email: michawe@ifi.uio.no


   Alexander Clemm
   Email: alex@clemm.org


   Ali Rezaki
   Nokia
   Email: ali.rezaki@nokia.com


   Eve Schooler
   Email: eve.schooler@gmail.com


   Sebastien Rumley
   HEFR
   Email: sebastien.rumley@hefr.ch


   Hesham ElBakoury
   Email: helbakoury@gmail.com


   Emile Stephan
   Orange
   Email: emile.stephan@orange.com


   Marisol Palmero
   Cisco
   Email: mpalmero@cisco.com


   Ari Keränen
   Ericsson
   Email: ari.keranen@ericsson.com


   Luis M. Contreras
   Telefonica
   Email: contreras.ietf@gmail.com


   Jan Lindblad
   All For Eco
   Email: jan.lindblad+ietf@for.eco
